Queen Victoria's British colonialism

About

During Queen Victoria's reign, the British Empire expanded across the globe and strengthened its title as a world superpower. The main area of colonization for Britain was Africa, which had large amounts of resources that were not being utilized. Specifically, Britain focused on Egypt, West Africa, and South Africa during the nineteenth century. Quicker trade routes, cash crops, and global power were reasons for the quick colonization of these areas. Britain became the undeniable global power and the country experienced major economic growth. However, most people avoided or neglected to think about the effects that colonialism had on the African colonies.


History of the Empire

The British Empire started expanding in the late 16th century when Elizabeth the Virgin Queen started engaging in Colonialism. One of the most important colonies, through its colonial charter company was the East India Company. When the industrial revolution came around the colonies could be sucked dry of their natural resources with total apathy. The industrial revolution of the 18th century had Britain in a head start and became the richest country for the next 2 centuries. The empire, by Victoria's time, was so huge that some part of it always had the sun and some part always had the moon on the sky at any given time.

In the 19th century, Africa became a patchwork of European colonies. Although colonies like Liberia and Sierra Leone were founded by American and British abolitionists as homelands for freed slaves, colonies were mainly set up to exploit the natural resources of the African continent. The Boer War (1899-1902), pitted Britain against Boer colonists for the possession of the interior of South Africa. Less well known is the Ethiopian War (1895-1896) in which the native ruler, Menelik II (1889-1913), defeated an Italian army. Ethiopia was the only African state to remain free of direct colonial control.

The British Empire of the 19th century is best known for its queen, Victoria (1837-1901). In British North America, clashes with the United States during the War of 1812 and growing concerns about possible American annexation during the Civil War (1861-1865) led to the creation of the independent Dominion of Canada by Act of Confederation in 1867. Australia was still used as a British penal colony in the first half of the 19th century, but by 1868, shipments of convicts were replaced by free immigrants. In 1901, Australia became an independent commonwealth. Both Canada and Australia are still part of the British Commonwealth as of writing.

Just like other industrial societies, British society saw remarkable changes during this period. The Victorian society was divided into the Lower, Woring, Middle, and Noble/Ruling classes.
Cities of the working class saw poor and overcrowded accommodations which lacked sanitation and even the working condition was also unregulated and sometimes dangerous, while a new group, middle class, emerged that included factory owners, proprietors, and businessmen. Most of these men were hardworking and frugal, living in moderate luxuries accessible at that time. This class could read and write as well as afford to buy newspapers, magazines, books and novels. At the bottom of the society were people who were unemployed and lived in slums. Many turned out criminals like pickpockets, thieves and prostitutes.

The decline of the British Empire started in the early part of the twentieth century. With many more reasons, the prime reason was that Britain lost the supremacy in military and navy. After the World War II, Britain was no longer capable of financially supporting its empire as it had now, a legacy of debts and affording an Empire was not possible.


The effects of Colonialism on literature and art

The great upsurge of imperial activity during the 19th century, though physically taking place in areas distant from British shores, had a broad impact on British culture. In the view of many critics, irrespective of the direct involvement of individual literary works with the colonial enterprise, the overall contours of Victorian literature are consistently shaped by the influence of colonial ideology, which informed the collective unconscious of the British public during the entire period and effects of it can still be percived today, especially from Royalists and British nationalists, as well as certain radical political groups.

The most obvious influence of colonialism on Victorian literature is evident in the colonial novels of writers like H. Rider Haggard, Rudyard Kipling, and Joseph Conrad. These novels are usually set in the distant lands that Britain colonized and attempt to expose the insular domestic public to the exotic strangeness of their country's colonial possessions. The reality of colonialism enters these texts as the necessary background that makes possible their narratives of adventure and romance. The linking of colonialism with the genre of the romantic adventure story is also evident in the abundant children's fiction of the time. While using Britain's colonial enterprise as the setting of their narratives, such novels also participate in the construction and propagation of colonial ideology by providing an implicit justification for British imperialism. Colonialism, therefore, appears in these colonial novels not only as the literal backdrop for their narrative action, but also as the ideological framework that provides the purpouse of the action. 

The impact of colonialism, however, is not restricted to the so-called colonial, orientalist novels. The nineteenth century's dominant genre of domestic fiction is also implicitly informed by colonial ideology. Though the novels of writers like Jane Austen, Charlotte Brönte, Charles Dickens, and George Eliot focus on domestic British society, Britain's overseas possessions frequently play an important role in the action. Thus, Sir Thomas Bertram's estate in Mansfield Park is maintained by his possessions in Antigua while David Copperfield's Mr. Micawber achieves success in Australia and St. John Rivers in Jane Eyre leaves for India to fulfill his missionary aspirations. 

The implicit presence in these novels of ideas such as the savage nature of natives and the white man's burden of bringing civilization to them also involves these texts in the dissemination of racial and colonial ideologies that provided the conceptual framework for colonialism. 

Though an awareness of the colonial presence in Victorian literature is evident in critical studies during the first half of the twentieth century, such criticism is usually restricted to an examination of colonial novels and an evaluation of the authors' differing attitudes to the colonial enterprise as reflected in their writings. It is only in the latter half of the twentieth century, in the so-called postcolonial period, that critics have explored the pervasive influence of colonial ideology throughout nineteenth-century British culture and society.

Fun fact: The reason English no longer has an informal 2nd person prronoun is colonialism and the industrial revolution. After the invention of the printing press, they started replacing informal 2nd person pronouns (thou, thee, thyself) with formal (you, you, yourself) because the printing presses couldn't have enough Ts and Hs to be stored in an efficient way. After this, informal references were made only among illiterate peasants and commonfolk, and as literacy increased durring the Industrial Revolution, refering to other literate people as "thou" became disresspectful, and slowly fell out of fashion.

Fun fact: She survived 6 attempts on her life and lived to be the longest reigning monarch at the time, dying at 81 years old.

Fun fact: She received titles and honours from 16 foreign nations.

Fun fact:she was a midget at 4 feet 11 inches (150 cm) tall.

Fun fact: She was the first british monarch to officially recognize their frienship with a lowborn person of color.

Fun fact: She is the reason most people descened from formal European royal houses have hereditary Haemophilia.